---
layout:   post
title:    "NLP Lecture 05: Introduction to Syntax and Formal Languages"
subtitle: "BLOG + LINK"
category: studylog
tags: nlp
---


# NLP Lecture 05: Introduction to Syntax and Formal Languages

Keywords: Introduction to Syntax and Formal Languages.

## Syntax
### Syntax as an Interface
- Syntax can be seen as the interface between morphology (structure of words) and semantics.
- Can judge if a sentence is grammatical or not, even if it doesn’t make sense semantically.

### Key Concepts of Syntax
- Constituency and Recursion.
- Dependency.
- Grammatical Relations.
- Subcategorization.
- Long-distance dependencies

## Constituents
A constituent is a group of words that behave as a single unit (within a hierarchical structure).

### Constituency 
There is a great number of constituency tests. They typically involve moving constituents around or replacing them.
- Topicalization
- Pro-form Substitution
- Wh-question test.

### Constituent Labels
- Choose constituents so each one has one non-bracketed word: the head.
- Category of Constituent: XP, where X is the part-of-speech of the head: NP, VP, AdjP, AdvP, DetP

## Recursion in Language
- One of the most important attributes of Natural Languages is that they are recursive.
- There are infinitely many sentences in a language, but in predictable structures.

## Context Free Grammars (CFG)
A context free grammar is defined by:
- Set of **terminal symbols** $$\Sigma$$.
- Set of **non-terminal symbols** $$N$$.
- A **start symbol** $$S \in N$$.
- Set $$R$$ of **productions** of the form $$A \rightarrow \beta$$, where $$A \in N$$ and $$\beta \in (\Sigma \cup N)^*$$, i.e. $$\beta$$ is a string of terminals and non-terminals.

### Language of a CFG
- Given a CFG $$G=(N, \Sigma,R,S)$$:
    - Given a string $$\alpha A \gamma$$, where $$A \in N$$, we can derive $$\alpha \beta \gamma$$ if there is a production $$A \rightarrow \beta \in R$$.
    -  $$\alpha \implies \beta$$ means that $$G$$ can derive $$\beta$$ from $$\alpha$$ in a single step.
    - $$\alpha \implies \beta^*$$ means that $$G$$ can derive $$\beta$$ from $$\alpha$$ in a finite number of steps.
    - The language of G is defined as the set of all terminal strings that can be derived from the start symbol.
    - $$L(G) = \{\beta \in \Sigma ^*, s.t. S\implies ^* \beta\}$$

### Derivations and Derived Strings
- CFG is a string rewriting formalism, so the derived objects are strings.
- A derivation is a sequence of rewriting steps.
- CFGs are context free: applicability of a rule depends only on the nonterminal symbol, not on its context.
- Therefore, the order in which multiple non-terminals in a partially derived string are replaced does not matter. We can represent identical derivations in a derivation tree.
- The derivation tree implies a parse tree.

## Regular Grammars
A regular grammar is defined by:
- Set of **terminal symbols** $$\Sigma$$.
- Set of **non-terminal symbols** $$N$$.
- A **start symbol** $$S \in N$$.
- Set $$R$$ of **productions** of the form $$A \rightarrow aB$$ or $$A \rightarrow a$$, where $$A,B \in N$$ and $$a \in \Sigma$$.

### Finite State Automata
- Regular grammars can be implemented as finite state automata.
- The set of all regular languages is strictly smaller than the set of context-free languages.

## Center Embeddings
- Problem: Regular grammars cannot capture long-distance dependencies.

## Formal Grammar and Parsing
- Formal Grammars are used in linguistics, NLP, programming languages.
- We want to build a compact model that describes a complete language.
- Need efficient algorithms to determine if a sentence is in the language or not (recognition problem).
- We also want to recover the structure imposed by the grammar (parsing problem).